---
layout: page
title: Dissertation
subtitle: Variations in Separation of Powers: Institutional Designs, Policymaking, and
Citizens’ and Elites’ Preferences in Latin America
---

My dissertation project, **Variation in Separation of Powers: Institutional Designs, Policymaking, and Citizens' and Elites' Preferences in Latin America**, develops three essays that analyze why and how political institutions shape the behavior of citizens and elites. My dissertation employs the **Bayesian statistical techniques** most appropriate for establishing a clear connection between my theory and empirics, including a *Bayesian Binomial Hierarchical* model with a cross-level interaction to study the impact of institutional designs on legislators' success, a *Bayesian Hierarchical Ordered Logit* model to study how variation in the balance of power between branches of government affects citizens' perceptions of the work conducted by the president and the legislature, a *Bayesian Dynamic IRT* model to analyze the ideology of justices over time in Colombia. My papers leverage cross-sectional variation in political institutions in Latin American democracies. 

## Paper 1: Variation in the Separation of Power and Legislators' Preferences over Policy Outcomes

*Abstract:* In separation of powers systems, in theory, legislative and executive branches must concur for policies to be enacted. However, empirical research, especially on Latin American cases, suggests that rather than reaching a compromise, it is common for the executive to make the decisions while the legislature remains marginalized from the policymaking process. To the contrary, I argue that the formal powers ascribed to the president and the assembly, in interaction with their ideological divergence, can be used to understand important policy choices, including the allocation of government expenditures. I explore the success of the legislative majority at determining spending priorities. Looking at 12 Latin American democracies for the past 20 years, I find that when the median member and the president ideologically diverge, the spending priorities of the majority are likely to be reflected in budget outcomes, but only if the institutions that govern the budget-making process empower legislators.

## Paper 2: Variation in Separation of Powers and Executive and Legislative Accountability

*Abstract:* In separation of powers systems, the success of the president and the legislature in shaping policy varies with the balance of institutional power ascribed to each branch of government. In this  paper, I study the extent to which these institutional factors impact individual citizens' evaluation of the work carried out by each branch of government. I reason that individual citizens will evaluate a branch of government controlled by ideologically distant elected officials in a particularly negative way when it possesses the institutional powers necessary to change policy in its preferred direction. Leveraging variation in institutional designs in 11 Latin American democracies and relying on 17 AmericasBarometer surveys, I find that institutional designs affect individual citizens' perceptions of the work conducted by the president and the legislature, which should affect how they punish or reward elected officials for their actions.

## Paper 3: The Impact of Constitutional Courts on Policy Outcomes: Do Justices Strategically Anticipate Constitutional Overrides?

*Abstract:* In separation of power systems, in theory, the elected and judicial branches of government have to concur for policies to be successfully implemented, particularly if courts have the power to strike down legislation on grounds of constitutionality. Theoretical and empirical research, on the other hand, suggests that it is common for courts to remain marginalized from the policymaking process because of the hurdles they face when confronting the elected branches of government. This paper shows, however, that even in the absence of these hurdles, justices often have incentives to strategically avoid ruling against governmental decisions on grounds of constitutionality. I reason that justices have incentives to rationally anticipate the actions of the elected branches to avoid having their decisions overridden. Looking at the behavior of justices sitting in the Constitutional Court of Colombia, I find that they are more likely to strike down legislation if the government lacks enough support to pass constitutional amendments overriding their judicial decisions than if the government has the ability to overrule them.
